# Detection-of-Denial-of-Service-Attacks-Using-Echo-State-Networks
Defence against various cyber attacks is an important research area. Denial of Service and Distributed Denial of Service (DoS and DDoS) attacks are the major threats among many communication security issues, and the defence mechanisms against them have received considerable attention in cybersecurity. Due to the increasing number of vulnerable hosts and evolving DoS and DDoS attacks that are becoming more difficult to identify, a large number of detection, mitigation, and prevention approaches have been proposed.

The ﬁeld of machine learning is one of the fastest developing ﬁeld due to growing computing power and ability to store and process data at massive scales. Various machine learning techniques have been widely deployed and have proved useful in intrusion detection. In this Thesis, we detect known DoS and DDoS attacks by applying echo state network, a recurrent neural network training approach that belongs to reservoir computing computational framework. The idea of reservoir computing is that the difficulties of training RNN (i.e. discontinuous changes in behavior caused even by small changes due to cyclic dependencies in RNN) can be prevented by training only the memoryless output weights  while achieving great performance in various tasks and decreasing computational complexity and costs.

Being a practical and computationally non-expensive method, classical echo state network may not need full weights adaptation to solve predictive and classification supervised tasks with temporal data. The reservoir in the ESN, being an input driven dynamical system, allows us to obtain the desired y_i^(target),  and has two roles: it serves as a a memory of the input x(n) that belongs to R^(N_x), as well as a nonlinear high dimensional expansion z(n) of the input signal, where the input becomes linearly separable in the expanded space R^(N_z). The performance of the reservoir in the network depends on appropriate settings of global parameters: input scaling, spectral radius, leaking rate, size and sparsity of the reservoir, and distribution of nonzero elements. The most preferred option to learn output weights and also used in the Thesis is ridge regression. ESN was previously applied in speech recognition, handwriting recognition, robot motor control, financial forecasting, etc. It also has an advantage to be employed with non-conventional hardware platforms: e.g. optical systems, randomly crystallized nonlinear electronic circuits.

To ensure accurate detection with low false-alarm rates machine learning based models for their training utilize data sets that reflect the characteristics of diverse benign and malicious current network trends. We use recently generated network intrusion data sets: CIC-IDS2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018, and CICDDoS2019.  We describe the main properties and features of DoS attacks using Tableau 2019.4, and extract the most important features, using an Extra-Trees classifier to enhance the detection accuracy.

We evaluate the echo state network-based model and compared its performance based on accuracy, F-Score, and false alarm rate  to long short-term memory, a widely used recurrent neural network architecture. The following libraries are employed with Python 3.8: numpy, pandas, scipy, sklearn.
